<WRAP centeralign>
<fs xx-large><ff:'QuentinEF Medium'>DUNGEONS & DRAGONSDUNGEONS & DRAGONS</ff>®</fs>\\
<ff:'Souvenir Demi'><fs x-large>**Book I**</fs></ff>\\
<ff:'NauertWd-Plain'><fs xx-large>MEN & MAGIC</fs></ff>\\
<ff:'Souvenir Demi'>BY\\
GARY GYGAX & DAVE ARNESON\\


Dedicated to all the fantasy wargamers who have enthusiastically\\
played and expanded upon the CHAINMAIL® Fantasy Rules, with\\
thanks and gratitude. Here is something better! Special thanks to the\\
Midwest Military Simulation Association, the Lake Geneva Tactical\\
Studies Association, Rob Kuntz, and Tom Keogh (in memoriam).\\


Illustrations By\\
Keenan Powell, Greg Bell, C. Corey, D. Arneson,\\
T. Keogh, and David Sutherland</ff>\\
</WRAP>
<WRAP justify>
Index
Foreword .................................................................................................... 3
Introduction ............................................................................................... 4
Scope......... ............................................................................................... 5
Equipment ................................................................................................. 5
Preparations for the Campaign ..................................................................... 5
Characters ................................................................................................. 6
Character Alignment, Including Monsters ................................................ 9
Determination of Abilities ............................................................................ 10
Languages ................................................................................................ 12
Non-Player Characters ............................................................................... 12
Basic Equipment and Costs ......................................................................... 13
Encumbrance ............................................................................................. 15
Weights and Equivalents ............................................................................. 15
Levels and Number of Experience Points
Necessary to Attain Them .................................................................... 16
Statistics Regarding Classes ......................................................................... 17
Alternative Combat System .......................................................................... 19
Saving Throw Matrix .................................................................................. 20
Spells Table — Magic-Users ........................................................................ 21
Clerics ................................................................................ 22
Explanation of Spells .................................................................................. 23
Magical Research ...................................................................................... 34
Books of Spells .......................................................................................... 343
Foreword
ONCE UPON A TIME, long, long ago there was a little group known as the
Castle and Crusade Society. Their fantasy rules were published, and to this writer’s knowledge, brought about much of the current interest in fantasy wargaming.
For a time the group grew and prospered, and Dave Arneson decided to begin
a medieval fantasy campaign game for his active Twin Cities club. From the map
of the “land” of the “Great Kingdom” and environs — the territory of the C & C
Society — Dave located a nice bog wherein to nest the weird enclave of “Blackmoor,” a spot between the “Great Kingdom” and the fearsome “Egg of Coot.”
From the CHAINMAIL® fantasy rules he drew ideas for a far more complex and
exciting game, and thus began a campaign which still thrives as of this writing!
In due course the news reached my ears, and the result is what you have in your
hands at this moment. While the C & C Society is no longer, its spirit lives on, and
we believe that all wargamers who are interested in the medieval period, not just
fantasy buffs, will enjoy playing DUNGEONS & DRAGONS®. Its possibilities go
far beyond any previous offerings anywhere!
While it is possible to play a single game, unrelated to any other game events
past or future, it is the campaign for which these rules are designed. It is relatively
simple to set up a fantasy campaign, and better still, it will cost almost nothing. In
fact you will not even need miniature figures, although their occasional employment
is recommended for real spectacle when battles are fought. A quick glance at the
Equipment section of this booklet will reveal just how little is required. The most extensive requirement is time. The campaign referee will have to have sufficient time to
meet the demands of his players, he will have to devote a number of hours to laying
out the maps of his “dungeons” and upper terrain before the affair begins. The third
booklet of this set will be of great help in this respect, for a number of helpful suggestions regarding how to accomplish it all have been given in order to help you
accomplish the task with a minimum of time and effort. There should be no want of
players, for there is unquestionably a fascination in this fantasy game — evidenced
even by those who could not by any stretch of the imagination be termed ardent
wargamers. The longevity of existing campaigns (notably “Blackmoor” in the Twin
Cities and “Greyhawk” in Lake Geneva) and the demand for these rules from people
outside these campaigns point towards a fantastic future. Tactical Studies Rules believes that of all forms of wargaming, fantasy will soon become the major contender
for first place. The section of this booklet entitled Scope will provide an idea of just
how many possibilities are inherent in DUNGEONS & DRAGONS.
These rules are strictly fantasy. Those wargamers who lack imagination, those
who don’t care for Burroughs’ Martian adventures where John Carter is groping
through black pits, who feel no thrill upon reading Howard’s Conan saga, who do
not enjoy the de Camp & Pratt fantasies or Fritz Leiber’s Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser
pitting their swords against evil sorceries will not be likely to find DUNGEONS &
DRAGONS to their taste. But those whose imaginations know no bounds will find
that these rules are the answer to their prayers. With this last bit of advice we invite
you to read on and enjoy a “world” where the fantastic is fact and magic really
works!
E. Gary Gygax 1 November 1973
Tactical Studies Rules Editor Lake Geneva, Wisconsin4
INTRODUCTION:
These rules are as complete as possible within the limitations imposed by the
space of three booklets. That is, they cover the major aspects of fantasy campaigns
but still remain flexible. As with any other set of miniatures rules they are guidelines
to follow in designing your own fantastic-medieval campaign. They provide the
framework around which you will build a game of simplicity or tremendous complexity — your time and imagination are about the only limiting factors, and the
fact that you have purchased these rules tends to indicate that there is no lack of
imagination — the fascination of the game will tend to make participants find more
and more time. We advise, however, that a campaign be begun slowly, following
the steps outlined herein, so as to avoid becoming too bogged down with unfamiliar
details at first. That way your campaign will build naturally, at the pace best suited
to the referee and players, smoothing the way for all concerned. New details can
be added and old “laws” altered so as to provide continually new and different situations. In addition, the players themselves will interact in such a way as to make the
campaign variable and unique, and this is quite desirable.
If you are a player purchasing the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS rules in order to
improve your situation in an existing campaign, you will find that there is a great
advantage in knowing what is herein. If your referee has made changes in the
rules and/or tables, simply note them in pencil (for who knows when some flux of
the cosmos will make things shift once again!), and keep the rules nearby as you
play. A quick check of some rule or table may bring hidden treasure or save your
game “life.”
Men & Magic (Book I) details what characters can be played, potentials,
limitations, and various magical spells. Monsters & Treasure (Book II) describes
the beasts and creatures which will be encountered, as well as the kind and amount
of treasure they are likely to guard, including magical items. Finally, The Underworld & Wilderness Adventures (Book III) tells how to set up and actually play
the campaign. It is presented last in order to allow the reader to gain the perspective
necessary — the understanding of the two preceding booklets. Read through the
entire work in the order presented before you attempt to play.5
SCOPE:
With the various equipage listed in the following section, DUNGEONS &
DRAGONS will provide a basically complete, nearly endless campaign of all
levels of fantastic-medieval wargame play. Actually, the scope need not be restricted to the medieval; it can stretch from the prehistoric to the imagined future,
but such expansion is recommended only at such time as the possibilities in the
medieval aspect have been thoroughly explored. The use of paper, pencil and
map boards are standard. Miniature figures can be added if the players have
them available and so desire, but miniatures are not required, only esthetically
pleasing; similarly, unit counters can be employed — with or without figures —
although by themselves the bits of cardboard lack the eye-appeal of the varied
and brightly painted miniature figures.
Age Level: 12 years and up.
Number of Players: At least one referee and from four to fifty players can be
handled in any single campaign, but the referee to player ratio should be about
1:20 or thereabouts.
RECOMMENDED EQUIPMENT:
Dungeons & Dragons (you have it!)
Dice — The following different kinds of dice:
1 pair 4-sided dice 1 pair 20-sided dice
1 pair 8-sided dice 1 pair 12-sided dice
4 to 20 pairs 6-sided dice
Chainmail miniature rules, latest edition
1 3-Ring Notebook (referee and each player)
Graph Paper (6 lines per inch is best)
Sheet Protectors (heaviest possible)
3-Ring Lined Paper
Drafting Equipment and Colored Pencils
Scratch Paper and Pencils
Imagination
1 Patient Referee
Players
PREPARATION FOR THE CAMPAIGN:
The referee bears the entire burden here, but if care and thought are used, the
reward will more than repay him. First, the referee must draw out a minimum of
half a dozen maps of the levels of his “underworld,” people them with monsters of
various horrid aspect, distribute treasures accordingly, and note the location of the
latter two on keys, each corresponding to the appropriate level. This operation will
be more fully described in the third book of these rules. When this task is completed
the participants can then be allowed to make their first descent into the dungeons
beneath the “huge ruined pile, a vast castle built by generations of mad wizards and
insane geniuses.” Before they begin, players must decide what role they will play
in the campaign, human or otherwise, fighter, cleric, or magic-user. Thereafter they6
will work upwards — if they survive — as they gain “experience.” First, however, it
is necessary to describe fully the roles possible.
CHARACTERS:
There are three (3) main classes of characters:
Fighting-Men
Magic-Users
Clerics
Fighting-Men includes the characters of elves and dwarves and even halflings.
Magic-Users includes only men and elves. Clerics are limited to men only. All
non-human players are restricted in some aspects and gifted in others. This will be
dealt with in the paragraphs pertaining to each non-human type.
Fighting-Men: All magical weaponry is usable by fighters, and this in itself is a
big advantage. In addition, they gain the advantage of more “hit dice” (the score
of which determines how many points of damage can be taken before a character
is killed). They can use only a very limited number of magical items of the nonweaponry variety, however, and they can use no spells. Top-level fighters (Lords and
above) who build castles are considered “Barons,” and as such they may invest in
their holdings in order to increase their income (see the INVESTMENTS section of
Book III). Base income for a Baron is a tax rate of 10 Gold Pieces/inhabitant of the
barony/game year.
Magic-Users: Top level magic-users are perhaps the most powerful characters in
the game, but it is a long, hard road to the top, and to begin with they are weak, so
survival is often the question, unless fighters protect the low-level magical types until
they have worked up. The whole plethora of enchanted items lies at the magic-user’s
beck and call, save the arms and armor of the fighters (see, however, Elves); MagicUsers may arm themselves with daggers only. Wizards and above may manufacture
for their own use (or for sale) such items as potions, scrolls, and just about anything
else magical. Costs are commensurate with the value of the item, as is the amount of
game time required to enchant it.7
Examples of costs are:
Item Cost
Scroll of Spells 100 Gold Pieces/Spell/Spell Level/Week
(a 5th-level spell would require 500 GP and
5 weeks)
Potion of Healing 250 Gold Pieces + 1 week
Potion of Giant Strength 1,000 Gold Pieces + 4 weeks
Enchanting 20 Arrows 1,000 Gold Pieces + 4 weeks
Enchanting Armor to +1 2,000 Gold Pieces + 2 months
Wand of Cold 10,000 Gold Pieces + 6 months
X-Ray Vision Ring 50,000 Gold Pieces + 1 year
Research by magical types can be done at any level of experience, but the level of
magic involved dictates the possibility of success, as well as the amount of money
necessary to invest. Assume that a Magic-User can use a 4th-level spell (explained
later), therefore he could develop a new spell provided it was equal to or less than
4th level. All this will be explained fully in the section dealing with SPELLS.
Clerics: Clerics gain some of the advantages from both of the other two classes
(Fighting-Men and Magic-Users) in that they have the use of magic armor and
all non-edged magic weapons (no arrows!), plus they have numbers of their own
spells. In addition, they are able to use more of the magical items than are the
Fighting-Men. When Clerics reach the top level (Patriarch) they may opt to build
their own stronghold, and when doing so receive help from “above.” Thus, if
they spend 100,000 Gold Pieces in castle construction, they may build a fortress
of double that cost. Finally, “faithful” men will come to such a castle, being fanatically loyal, and they will serve at no cost. There will be from 10–60 heavy cavalry, 10–60 horsed crossbowmen (“Turcopole”-type), and 30–180 heavy foot.
Note that Clerics of 7th level and greater are either “Law” or “Chaos,” and
there is a sharp distinction between them. If a Patriarch receiving the above benefits
changes sides, all the benefits will immediately be removed!
Clerics with castles of their own will have control of a territory similar to the
“Barony” of fighters, and they will receive “tithes” equal to 20 Gold Pieces/Inhabitant/year.
Dwarves: Dwarves may opt only for the fighting class, and they may never progress beyond the 6th level (Myrmidon). Their advantages are: 1) they have a high
level of magic resistance, and they thus add four levels when rolling saving throws
(a 6th-level dwarf equals a 10th-level human); 2) they are the only characters able
to fully employ the +3 Magic War Hammer (explained in Book II); 3) they note
slanting passages, traps, shifting walls and new construction in underground settings; and 4) they are able to speak the languages of Gnomes, Kobolds and Goblins in addition to the usual tongues (see LANGUAGES in this book).8
Elves: Elves can begin as either Fighting-Men or Magic-Users and freely switch
class whenever they choose, from adventure to adventure, but not during the
course of a single game. Thus, they gain the benefits of both classes and may
use both weaponry and spells. They may use magic armor and still act as MagicUsers. However, they may not progress beyond 4th level Fighting-Man (Hero)
nor 8th level Magic-User (Warlock). Elves are more able to note secret and hidden doors. They also gain the advantages noted in the CHAINMAIL rules when
fighting certain fantastic creatures. Finally, Elves are able to speak the languages
of Orcs, Hobgoblins, and Gnolls in addition to their own (Elvish) and the other
usual tongues.
Halflings: Should any player wish to be one, he will be limited to the FightingMen class as a halfling. Halflings cannot progress beyond the 4th level (Hero),
but they will have magic-resistance equal to dwarves (add four levels for saving throws), and they will have deadly accuracy with missiles as detailed in
CHAINMAIL.
Other Character Types: There is no reason that players cannot be allowed to
play as virtually anything, provided they begin relatively weak and work up to
the top, i.e., a player wishing to be a Dragon would have to begin as, let us say,
a “young” one and progress upwards in the usual manner, steps being predetermined by the campaign referee.9
Character Alignment, Including Various Monsters and Creatures: Before the game begins it is not only necessary to select a role, but it is also necessary
to determine what stance the character will take — Law, Neutrality, or Chaos.
Character types are limited as follows by this alignment:
Law Neutrality Chaos
Men* Men* Men*
Halflings Nixies
Patriarchs Pixies Evil High Priests
Treants Dryads Goblins/Kobolds
Griffons Hobgoblins/Gnolls
Giants
Unicorns Animals Orcs
Pegasi Elves* Ogres
Hippogriffs Rocs* Trolls
Elves* Dwarves/Gnomes* Wights
Lycanthropes* Lycanthropes* Lycanthropes*
Rocs* Orcs Ghouls
Dwarves/Gnomes* Ogres
Centaurs* Dragons Wraiths
Wyverns Mummies
Centaurs* Spectres
Hydrae Vampires
Purple Worms Medusae
Sea Monsters Manticores
Chimeras Gargoyles
Minotaurs Gorgons
Giants Minotaurs
Dragons
Chimeras
* An asterisk indicates that the name appears in both the Law and Neutrality
columns.
An underline indicates that the name appears in both the Neutrality and
Chaos columns.10
Changing Character Class: While changing class (for other than elves) is not
recommended, the following rule should be applied: In order for men to change
class they must have a score of 16 or better in the prime requisite (see below) of
the class they wish to change to, and this score must be unmodified. A Cleric with
a “strength” of 15, for example, could not become a Fighting-Man. In any event
Magic-Users cannot become Clerics and vice-versa.
DETERMINATION OF ABILITIES:
Prior to the character selection by players it is necessary for the referee to roll
three six-sided dice in order to rate each as to various abilities, and thus aid them in
selecting a role. Categories of ability are: Strength, Intelligence, Wisdom, Constitution, Dexterity, and Charisma. Each player notes his appropriate scores, obtains a
similar roll of three dice to determine the number of Gold Pieces (Dice score × 10)
he starts with, and then opts for a role. A sample of the record of a character appears like this:
Name: Xylarthen Class: Magic-User
Strength: 6 Intelligence: 11 Wisdom: 13
Constitution: 12 Dexterity: 9 Charisma: 8
Gold Pieces
70
Experience
Nil
This supposed player would have progressed faster as a Cleric, but because
of a personal preference for magic opted for that class. With a strength of only
6 there was no real chance for him to become a fighter. His constitutional score
indicates good health and the ability to take punishment of most forms. A dexterity of 9 (low average) means that he will not be particularly fast nor accurate. He
is below average in charisma, but not hopelessly so.
Explanation of Abilities:
The first three categories are the prime requisites for each of the three classes:
Fighting-Men, Magic-Users, and Clerics. (See the Bonuses and Penalties to
Advancement due to Abilities table which appears hereafter.)
Strength is the prime requisite for fighters. Clerics can use strength on a 3 for 1
basis in their prime requisite area (wisdom), for purposes of gaining experience
only. Strength will also aid in opening traps and so on.
Intelligence is the prime requisite for magical types. Both fighters and Clerics can
use it in their prime requisite areas (strength and wisdom respectively) on a 2 for
1 basis. Intelligence will also affect referees’ decisions as to whether or not certain
action would be taken, and it allows additional languages to be spoken.
Wisdom is the prime requisite for Clerics. It may be used on a 3 for 1 basis by
fighters, and on a 2 for 1 basis by Magic-Users, in their respective prime requisite
areas. Wisdom rating will act much as does that for intelligence.
Constitution is a combination of health and endurance. It will influence such things
as the number of hits which can be taken and how well the character can withstand
being paralyzed, turned to stone, etc.11
Dexterity applies to both manual speed and conjuration. It will indicate the
character’s missile ability and speed with actions such as firing first, getting off a
spell, etc.
Charisma is a combination of appearance, personality, and so forth. Its primary
function is to determine how many hirelings of unusual nature a character can attract. This is not to say that he cannot hire men-at-arms and employ mercenaries, but
the charisma function will affect loyalty of even these men. Players will, in all probability, seek to hire Fighting-Men, Magic-Users, and/or Clerics in order to strengthen
their roles in the campaign. A player-character can employ only as many as indicated by his charisma score:
Charisma Score Maximum # Hirelings Loyalty Base
3–4 1 –2
5–6 2 –1
7–9 3 - -
10–12 4 - -
13–15 5 +1
16–17 6 +2
18 12 +4
In addition the charisma score is usable to decide such things as whether or not a
witch capturing a player will turn him into a swine or keep him enchanted as a lover.
Finally, charisma will aid a character in attracting various monsters to his service.
Bonuses and Penalties to Advancement due to Abilities:
(Low score is 3–8; Average is 9–12; High is 13–18)
Prime requisite 15 or more: Add 10% to earned experience
Prime requisite 13 or 14: Add 5% to earned experience
Prime requisite of 9–12: Average, no bonus or penalty
Prime requisite 8 or 7: Minus 10% from earned experience
Prime requisite 6 or less: Minus 20% from earned experience
Constitution 15 or more: Add +1 to each hit die
Constitution 13 or 14: Will withstand adversity
Constitution of 9–12: 60% to 90% chance of survival
Constitution 8 or 7: 40% to 50% chance of survival
Constitution 6 or less: Minus 1 from each hit die*
Dexterity above 12: Fire any missile at +1
Dexterity under 9: Fire any missile at –1
* minimum score of 1 on any die
Note: Average scores are 9–12. Units so indicated above may be used to increase
prime requisite total insofar as this does not bring that category below average, i.e.
below a score of 9.12
LANGUAGES: The “common tongue” spoken throughout the “continent” is known
by most humans. All other creatures and monsters which can speak have their own
language, although some (20%) also know the common one. Law, Chaos and
Neutrality also have common languages spoken by each respectively. One can attempt to communicate through the common tongue, language particular to a creature class, or one of the divisional languages (law, etc.). While not understanding
the language, creatures who speak a divisional tongue will recognize a hostile
one and attack. Characters with an Intelligence above 10 may learn additional
languages, one language for every point above 10 intelligence factors. Thus, a
man with an intelligence level of 15 could speak 7 languages, i.e. the common
tongue, his divisional language, and 5 creature languages. Of course, MagicUsers’ spells and some magic items will enable the speaking and understanding
of languages.
NON-PLAYER CHARACTERS:
In all probability the referee will find it beneficial to allow participants in the
campaign to “hire into service” one or more characters. At times this may be nothing more than a band of mercenaries hired to participate in and share the profits
from some adventure. However it is likely that players will be desirous of acquiring a
regular entourage of various character types, monsters, and an army of some form.
Non-player characters can be hired as follows:
Only the lowest level of character types can be hired. The player wishing to
hire a non-player character “advertises” by posting notices at inns and taverns,
frequents public places seeking the desired hireling, or sends messengers to whatever place the desired character type would be found (elf-land, dwarf-land, etc.).
This costs money and takes time, and the referee must determine expenditures.
Once some response has been obtained, the player must make an offer to tempt
the desired character type into his service. As a rule of thumb, a minimum offer of
100 Gold Pieces would be required to tempt a human into service, dwarves are
more interested in gold, Magic-Users and elves desire magical items, and Clerics
want some assurance of having a place of worship in which to house themselves.
Monsters can be lured into service if they are of the same basic alignment as
the player-character, or they can be Charmed and thus ordered to serve. Note,
however, that the term “monster” includes men found in the dungeons, so in this
way some high-level characters can be brought into a character’s service, charisma
allowing or through a Charm spell. Some reward must be offered to a monster in
order to induce it into service (not just sparing its life, for example). The monster will
react, with appropriate pluses or minuses, according to the offer, the referee rolling
two six-sided dice and adjusting for charisma:
Dice Score Reaction
2 Attempts to attack
3–5 Hostile reaction
6–8 Uncertain
9–11 Accepts offer
12 Enthusiast, Loyalty +3
An “Uncertain” reaction leaves the door open to additional reward offers, but
scores under 6 do not.13
Capture of Non-Player Monsters: Morale dice can cause a man or intelligent
monster to attempt to surrender or become subdued. When this happens an offer of
service can be made (assuming that communication is possible) as outlined above.
Subdued monsters will obey for a time without need to check their reactions, and
such monsters are salable (see Book II).
Loyalty of Non-Player Characters (Including Monsters): Men, dwarves
and elves will serve as retainers with relative loyalty so long as they receive their
pay regularly, are treated fairly, are not continually exposed to extra-hazardous
duty, and receive bonuses when they are taking part in some dangerous venture.
Judgement of this matter is perforce subjective on the part of the campaign referee,
but there is a simple guideline: When one or more of such characters are taken into
service a loyalty check is made by rolling three-six-sided dice. Adjustments are made
for charisma and initial payments for service, and the loyalty of the character(s)
noted by the referee. (The player will not have any knowledge of what it is without
some method of reading minds.)
Loyalty Score Morale
3 or less Will desert at first opportunity
4–6 –2 on morale dice
7–8 –1 on morale dice
9–12 Average morale dice
13–14 +1 on morale dice
15–18 +2 on morale dice
19 and above Need never check morale
Non-player characters and men-at-arms will have to make morale checks (using the
above reaction table or “Chainmail”) whenever a highly dangerous or unnerving situation arises. Poor morale will mean that those in question will not perform as expected.
Periodic re-checks of loyalty should be made. Length of service, rewards, etc.
will bring additional pluses. Poor treatment will bring minuses.
Relatives: The referee may allow players to designate one relative of his character
to inherit his possessions if for any reason the participant unexpectedly disappears,
with or without “death” being positively established, for a period of one game
month, let us say. At this time the relative would inherit the estate of the character,
paying a 10% tax on all goods and monies. The relative must start at the lowest level
of the class he opts for, but he will have the advantage of the inheritance.
If the character returns, he takes possession of his estate once more (referee’s
option as to willingness of the relative to give it up) but must pay an additional 10%
tax in order to regain his own. Optionally the relative may be allowed to stay on as
a non-player character in the service of the player-character. Loyalty of the relative
in such a circumstance would be at a penalty of from 0 to -6, and he would possibly
intrigue to regain control.
Characters without a relative will lose all their possessions should they disappear
and not return before whatever period is designated as establishing death.
BASIC EQUIPMENT AND COSTS:
It will be necessary for players to equip their characters with various basic items
of equipment. Selection of items is strictly up to the players, and Gold Pieces are14
taken away accordingly (players may sell to one another, of course, and then Gold
Pieces would be transferred).
Item Cost
Dagger 3
Hand Axe 3
Mace 5
Sword 10
Battle Axe 7
Morning Star 6
Flail 8
Spear 1
Pole Arm 7
Halberd 7
Two-Handed Sword 15
Lance 4
Pike 5
Short Bow 25
Long Bow 40
Composite Bow 50
Light Crossbow 15
Heavy Crossbow 25
Quiver of 20 Arrows 10
Case with 30 Quarrels 10
20 Arrows/30 Quarrels 5
Silver Tipped Arrow 5
Mule 20
Draft Horse 30
Light Horse 40
Warhorse, Medium 100
Warhorse, Heavy 200
Saddle 25
Saddle Bags 10
Cart 100
Wagon 200
Raft 40
Small Boat 100
Small Merchant Ship 5,000
Large Merchant Ship 20,000
Small Galley 10,000
Large Galley 30,000
Item Cost
Leather Armor 15
Chain-type Mail 30
Plate Mail 50
Helmet 10
Shield 10
Barding (Horse Armor) 150
50’ of Rope 1
10’ Pole 1
12 Iron Spikes 1
Small Sack 1
Large Sack 2
Leather Back Pack 5
Water/Wine Skin 1
6 Torches 1
Lantern 10
Flask of Oil 2
3 Stakes & Mallet 3
Steel Mirror 5
Silver Mirror, Small 15
Wooden Cross 2
Silver Cross 25
Holy Water/Vial 25
Wolvesbane, bunch 10
Belladonna, bunch 10
Garlic, bud 5
Wine, quart 1
Iron Rations (for dungeon 15
expeditions) 1 person/1 week
Standard Rations for 1 person, 5
1 week
Other items’ cost may be
calculated by comparing to
similar items listed above.15
(Weight which can be carried)
Weight of a man - - 1,750
Load in Gold Pieces Equal to Light Foot Movement (12”) - - 750
Load in Gold Pieces Equal to Heavy Foot Movement (9”) - - 1,000
Load in Gold Pieces Equal to Armed Foot Movement (6”) - - 1,500
Leather Armor or Saddle - - 250
Chain-Type Armor - - 500
Plate Mail or Horse Armor - - 750
Helmet - - 50
Shield - - 150
Pole Arms, Halberd, Pike, Two-Handed Sword (each) - - 150
Morning Star, Flail, Battle Axe (each) - - 100
Sword, Mace, Hand Axe, Bow & Arrows (each) - - 50
Dagger - - 20
Miscellaneous Equipment (rope, spikes, bags, etc.) - - 80
Maximum Load/Person at half normal movement - - 3,000
Example Employing Encumbrance: A character equips himself with the
following:
Plate Armor 750
Helmet 50
Shield 150
Flail 100
Bow, Quiver & 20 Arrows 50
Dagger 20
Misc. Equipment 80
TOTAL 1,200
The character would move at the speed of an Armored Footman (6”/turn).
He could pick up an additional 300 Gold Pieces weight of treasure and incur no
movement penalty. Weight over 1,500 would incur the penalty of half-speed noted
above, although equipment could be discarded in order to avoid this penalty.
WEIGHT AND EQUIVALENTS:
1 Coin (Copper, Silver, or Gold) 1
1 Small Sack Holds 50
1 Large Sack or Back Pack Holds 300
1 Scroll or Piece of Jewelry 20
1 Potion or Wine Skin 30
1 Flagon or Chalice 50
1 Wand with Case 100
1 Staff with Case 300
1 Gem 116
LEVELS AND NUMBER OF EXPERIENCE POINTS NECESSARY TO
ATTAIN THEM:
Fighting-Men Magic-Users Clerics
Veteran 0 Medium 0 Acolyte 0
Warrior 2,000 Seer 2,500 Adept 1,500
Swordsman 4,000 Conjurer 5,000 Village Priest 3,000
Hero* 8,000 Theurgist 10,000 Vicar 6,000
Swashbuckler 16,000 Thaumaturgist 20,000 Curate 12,000
Myrmidon** 32,000 Magician 35,000 Bishop 25,000
Champion 64,000 Enchanter 50,000 Lama 50,000
Superhero 120,000 Warlock* 75,000 Patriarch 100,000
Lord 240,000 Sorcerer 100,000
Necromancer 200,000
Wizard 300,000
*highest level for elf
**highest level for dwarf17
STATISTICS REGARDING CLASSES:
Fighting-Men Dice for Accumulative Hits
Fighting
Capability
Spells & Level
1 2 3 4 5 6
Veteran 1 + 1 Man + 1 NIL
Warrior 2 2 Men + 1 NIL
Swordsman 3 3 Men or Hero – 1 NIL
Hero 4 Hero NIL
Swashbuckler 5 + 1 Hero + 1 or 5 Men NIL
Myrmidon 6 Hero + 1 or 6 Men NIL
Champion 7 + 1 Superhero – 1 NIL
Super Hero 8 + 2 Superhero NIL
Lord 9 + 3 Superhero + 1 NIL
Lord, 10th Level 10 + 1 Superhero + 1 NIL
Magic-Users
Medium 1 Man 1 – – – – –
Seer 1 + 1 Man + 1 2 – – – – –
Conjurer 2 2 Men 3 1 – – – –
Theurgist 2 + 1 2 Men + 1 4 2 – – – –
Thaumaturgist 3 3 Men 4 2 1 – – –
Magician 3 + 1 3 Men + 1 4 2 2 – – –
Enchanter 4 Hero – 1 4 3 2 1 – –
Warlock 5 Hero 4 3 3 2 – –
Sorcerer 6 + 1 Hero + 1 4 3 3 2 1 –
Necromancer 7 Wizard 4 4 3 3 2 –
Wizard 8 + 1 Wizard 4 4 4 3 3 –
Wizard, 12th Level 8 + 2 Wizard 4 4 4 4 4 1
Wizard, 13th Level 8 + 3 Wizard 5 5 5 4 4 2
Wizard, 14th Level 8 + 4 Wizard + 1 5 5 5 4 4 3
Wizard, 15th Level 9 + 1 Wizard + 1 5 5 5 4 4 4
Wizard, 16th Level 9 + 2 Wizard + 2 5 5 5 5 5 518
Clerics
Acolyte 1 Man – – – – – –
Adept 2 Man + 1 1 – – – – –
Village Priest 3 2 Men 2 – – – – –
Vicar 4 3 Men 2 1 – – – –
Curate 4 + 1 3 Men + 1 2 2 – – – –
Bishop 5 Hero – 1 2 2 1 1 – –
Lama 6 Hero 2 2 2 1 1 –
Patriarch 7 Hero + 1 2 2 2 2 2 –
Patriarch, 9th Level 7 + 1 Superhero – 1 3 3 3 2 2 –
Patriarch, 10th Level 7 + 2 Superhero – 1 3 3 3 3 3 –
Experience Points: Experience points are awarded to players by the referee
with appropriate bonuses or penalties for prime requisite scores. As characters
meet monsters in mortal combat and defeat them, and when they obtain various
forms of treasure (money, gems, jewelry, magical items, etc.), they gain “experience.” This adds to their experience point total, gradually moving them upwards
through the levels. Gains in experience points will be relative; thus an 8th-level
Magic-User operating on the 5th dungeon level would be awarded 5/8 experience. Let us assume he gains 7,000 Gold Pieces by defeating a troll (which is a
7th-level monster, as it has over 6 hit dice). Had the monster been only a 5th-level
one, experience would be awarded on a 5/8 basis as already stated, but as the
monster guarding the treasure was a 7th-level one, experience would be awarded
on a 7/8 basis thus; 7,000 GP + 700 for killing the troll = 7,700 divided by 8
= 962.5 × 7 = 6,037.5. Experience points are never awarded above a 1 for 1
basis, so even if a character defeats a higher-level monster he will not receive
experience points above the total of treasure combined with the monster’s kill
value. It is also recommended that no more experience points be awarded for any
single adventure than will suffice to move the character upwards one level. Thus
a “veteran” (1st level) gains what would ordinarily be 5,000 experience points;
however, as this would move him upwards two levels, the referee should award
only sufficient points to bring him to “warrior” (2nd level), say 3,999 if the character began with 0 experience points.
Levels: There is no theoretical limit to how high a character may progress, i.e.
20th-level Lord, 20th-level Wizard, etc. Distinct names have only been included for
the base levels, but this does not influence progression.
Dice for Accumulative Hits (Hit Dice): This indicates the number of dice which
are rolled in order to determine how many hit points a character can take. Pluses are
merely the number of pips to add to the total of all dice rolled not to each die. Thus
a Superhero gets 8 dice + 2; they are rolled and score 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 5, 6/totals
26 + 2 = 28, 28 being the number of points of damage the character could sustain
before death. Whether sustaining accumulative hits will otherwise affect a character
is left to the discretion of the referee.
Fighting Capability: This is a key to use in conjunction with the CHAINMAIL fantasy rule, as modified in various places herein. An alternative system will be given
later for those who prefer a different method.19
Spells & Levels: The number above each column is the spell level (complexity, a
somewhat subjective determination on the part of your authors). The number in each
column opposite each applicable character indicates the number of spells of each
level that can be used (remembered during any single adventure) by that character.
Spells are listed and explained later. A spell used once may not be reused in the
same day.
Levels Above those Listed: Progressions of Dice for Accumulative Hits, Fighting Capability, and Spells & Levels may not be evident. An 11th-level Lord would
get 10 + 3 dice and fight as he did at the 10th level; but at 12th level, he could
get 11 + 1 dice and fight at Superhero + 2. At 13th level dice would be 11 + 3
with Fighting Capability at Superhero + 2. A 17th-level Wizard would get 9 +
3 dice and fight as at 16th level, just as an 18th-level Wizard would get dice of
10 + 1 with no change in Fighting Capabilities — the change coming at the 19th
level, fighting then being done at Wizard + 3. An 11th-level Patriarch would get
dice of 7 + 3 with Fighting Capability unchanged; at 12th level dice would be
8 + 1 with no change in fighting; and at 13th level the Patriarch would get 8 +
2 and fight as a Superhero — the next change in Fighting Capability coming at
the 17th level.
Spell progression for Magic-Users is: 17th-level Wizard — 6, 6, 6, 5, 5, 5; 18thlevel Wizard — sizes across the board; and so on. Spell progression for Clerics is:
11th-level Patriarch — 4, 4, 4, 3, 3; 12th-level Patriarch — fours across the board;
13th-level Patriarch — 5, 5, 5, 4, 4; and so on.
ALTERNATIVE COMBAT SYSTEM:
This system is based upon the defensive and offensive capabilities of the combatants; such things as speed, ferocity, and weaponry of the monster attacking are
subsumed in the matrixes. There are two charts, one for men versus men or monsters
and one for monsters (including kobolds, goblins, orcs, etc.) versus men.
ATTACK MATRIX 1.: MEN ATTACKING
TARGET:
Armor
Class Description
20-Sided Die Score to Hit by Level*
Level 1–3 4–6 7–9 10–12 13–15 16&+
2 Plate Armor & Shield 17 15 12 10 8 5
3 Plate Armor 16 14 11 9 7 4
4 Chain Mail & Shield 15 13 10 8 6 3
5 Chain Mail 14 12 9 7 5 2
6 Leather & Shield 13 11 8 6 4 1
7 Leather Armor 12 10 7 5 3 1
8 Shield Only 11 9 6 4 2 1
9 No Armor or Shield 10 8 5 3 1 1
*Fighting-Men: Magic-Users advance in steps based
on five levels/group (1–5, 6–10, etc.), and Clerics in steps
based on four levels/group (1–4, 5–8, etc.). Normal men
equal 1st-level fighters.
All attacks which score hits do 1–6 points damage unless otherwise noted.20
ATTACK MATRIX II.: MONSTERS ATTACKING
TARGET:
Armor
Class Description
20-Sided Die Score to Hit by Monster’s Dice #
Dice Up
to 1 1 + 1 2–3 3–4 4–6 6–8 9–10 11&+
2 All as in Table 17 16 15 13 12 11 9 7
3 1. above... 16 15 14 12 11 10 8 6
4 15 14 13 11 10 9 7 5
5 14 13 12 10 9 8 6 4
6 13 12 11 9 8 7 5 3
7 12 11 10 8 7 6 4 2
8 11 10 9 7 6 5 3 1
9 10 9 8 6 5 4 2 0
All base scores to hit will be modified by magic armor and weaponry. Missile
hits will be scored by using the above tables at long range and decreasing Armor
Class by 1 at medium and 2 at short range.
SAVING THROW MATRIX:
Class &
Level
Death Ray
or Poison
All Wands —
Including
Polymorph or
Paralyzation Stone
Dragon
Breath
Staves
&
Spells
Fighting-Men 1–3 12 13 14 15 16
Magic-User 1–5 13 14 13 16 15
Cleric 1–4 11 12 14 16 15
Fighter 4–6 10 11 12 13 14
Magic User 6–10 11 12 11 14 12
Cleric 5–8 9 10 12 14 12
Fighter 7–9 8 9 10 10 12
Magic-User 11–15 8 9 8 11 8
Cleric 9–12 6 7 9 11 9
Fighter 10–12 6 7 8 8 10
Magic-User 16+ 5 6 5 8 3
Cleric 13+ 3 5 7 8 7
Fighter 13+ 4 5 5 5 8
Failure to make the total indicated above results in the weapon having full effect,
i.e. you are turned to stone, take full damage from dragon’s breath, etc. Scoring the
total indicated above (or scoring higher) means the weapon has no effect (death ray,
polymorph, paralyzation, stone, or spell) or one-half effect (poison scoring one-half
of the total possible hit damage and dragon’s breath scoring one-half of its full damage). Wands of cold, fire balls, lightning, etc. and staves are treated as indicated,
but saving throws being made result in one-half damage.21
SPELLS TABLE
Magic-Users:
1st Level 2nd Level 3rd Level
1. Detect Magic Detect Invisible Fly
2. Hold Portal Levitate Hold Person
3. Read Magic Phantasmal Forces Dispel Magic
4. Read Languages Locate Object Clairvoyance
5. Protection/Evil Invisibility Clairaudience
6. Light Wizard Lock Fire Ball
7. Charm Person Detect Evil Lightning Bolt
8. Sleep ESP Protection/Evil, 10’ r.
9. Continual Light Invisibility, 10’ r.
10. Knock Infravision
11. Slow Spell
12. Haste Spell
13. Protection/Normal Missiles
14. Water Breathing
4th Level 5th Level 6th Level
1. Polymorph Self Teleport Stone to Flesh
2. Polymorph Others Hold Monster Reincarnation
3. Remove Curse Conjure Elemental Invisible Stalker
4. Wall of Fire Telekinesis Lower Water
5. Wall of Ice Transmute Rock–Mud Part Water
6. Confusion Wall of Stone Projected Image
7. Charm Monster Wall of Iron Anti-Magic Shell
8. Growth/Plant Animate Dead Death Spell
9. Dimension Door Magic Jar Geas
10. Wizard Eye Contact Higher Plane Disintegrate
11. Massmorph Passwall Move Earth
12. Hallucinatory Terrain Cloudkill Control Weather
13. Feeblemind
14. Growth of Animals22
SPELLS TABLE
Clerics:
1st Level 2nd Level 3rd Level
1. Cure Light Wounds Find Traps Remove Curse
2. Purify Food & Water Hold Person Cure Disease
3. Detect Magic Bless Locate Object
4. Detect Evil Speak with Animals Continual Light
5. Protection/Evil
6. Light
4th Level 5th Level
1. Neutralize Poison Dispel Evil
2. Cure Serious Wounds Raise Dead
3. Protection/Evil, 10’r. Commune
4. Turn Sticks to Snakes Quest
5. Speak with Plants Insect Plague
6. Create Water Create Food
Clerics versus Undead Monsters:
Monster
Type Acolyte Adept
Village
Priest Vicar Curate Bishop Lama Patriarch
Skeleton 7 T T D D D D D
Zombie 9 7 T T D D D D
Ghoul 11 9 7 T T D D D
Wight N 11 9 7 T T D D
Wraith N N 11 9 7 T T D
Mummy N N N 11 9 7 T T
Spectre N N N N 11 9 7 T
Vampire N N N N N 11 9 7
Numbers are the score to match or exceed in order to turn away, rolled with two
six-sided dice.
T = Monster turned away, up to two dice in number.
D = Dispelled/dissolved, up to two dice in number.
N = No Effect.
A full explanation of each spell follows. Note that underlined Clerical spells are
reversed by evil Clerics. Also, note the Clerics versus Undead Monsters table, indicating the strong effect of the various clerical levels upon the undead; however, evil
Clerics do not have this effect, the entire effect being lost.23
EXPLANATION OF SPELLS:
Magic-Users:
1st Level:
Detect Magic: A spell to determine if there has been some enchantment laid on
a person, place or thing. It has a limited range and short duration. It is useful, for
example, to discover if some item is magical, a door has been “held” or “wizard
locked,” etc.
Hold Portal: A spell to hold a door, gate or the like. It is similar to a locking spell
(see below) but it is not permanent. Roll two dice to determine the duration of the
spell in turns. Dispel Magic (see below) will immediately negate it, a strong antimagical creature will shatter it and a Knock (see below) will open it.
Read Magic: The means by which the incantations on an item or scroll are read.
Without such a spell or similar device magic is unintelligible to even a Magic-User.
The spell is of short duration (one or two readings being the usual limit).
Read Languages: The means by which directions and the like are read, particularly on treasure maps. It is otherwise like the Read Magic spell above.
Protection from Evil: This spell hedges the conjurer round with a magic circle to
keep out attacks from enchanted monsters. It also serves as an “armor” from various
evil attacks, adding a +1 to all saving throws and taking a –1 from hit dice of evil
opponents. (Note that this spell is not cumulative in effect with magic armor and
rings, although it will continue to keep out enchanted monsters.) Duration: 6 turns.
Light: A spell to cast light in a circle 3” in diameter, not equal to full daylight. It lasts
for a number of turns equal to 6 + the number of levels of the user; thus, a 7th-level
Magic-User would cast the spell for 13 turns.
Charm Person: This spell applies to all two-legged, generally mammalian figures
near to or less than man-size, excluding all monsters in the “Undead” class but
including Sprites, Pixies, Nixies, Kobolds, Goblins, Orcs, Hobgoblins and Gnolls.
If the spell is successful it will cause the charmed entity to come completely under
the influence of the Magic-User until such time as the “charm” is dispelled (Dispel
Magic). Range: 12”.
Sleep: A Sleep spell affects from 2–16 1st-level types (hit dice of up to 1 + 1), from
2–12 2nd-level types (hit dice of up to 2 + 1), from 1–6 3rd-level types, and but
1 4th-level type (up to 4 + 1 hit dice). The spell always affects up to the number of
creatures determined by the dice. If more than the number rolled could be affected,
determine which “sleep” by random selection. Range: 24”.
2nd Level:
Detect Invisible (Objects): A spell to find secreted treasure hidden by an Invisibility spell (see below). It will also locate invisible creatures. Durations: 6 turns.
Range: 1” × the level of the Magic-User casting it, i.e. a “Wizard” would have a
range of 11”, more if he was above the base value.
Levitate: This spell lifts the caster, all motion being in the vertical plane; however,
the user could, for example, levitate to the ceiling, and move horizontally by use of
his hands. Duration: 6 turns + the level of the user. Range (of levitation): 2”/level of
Magic-User, with upwards motion at 6”/turn.24
Phantasmal Forces: The creation of vivid illusions of nearly anything the user
envisions (a projected mental image so to speak). As long as the caster concentrates
on the spell, the illusion will continue unless touched by some living creature, so
there is no limit on duration, per se. Damage caused to viewers of a Phantasmal
Force will be real if the illusion is believed to be real. Range: 24”.
Locate Object: In order for this spell to be effective it must be cast with certain
knowledge of what is to be located. Thus, the exact nature, dimensions, coloring, etc. of some magical item would have to be known in order for the spell to
work. Well known objects such as a flight of stairs leading upwards can be detected with this spell however. The spell gives the user the direction of the object
desired but not the distance. The desired object must be within range. Range:
6” + 1“/level of the Magic-User employing the spell, i.e. a “Necromancer” has
a 16” range.
Invisibility: A spell which lasts until it is broken by the user or by some outside
force (remember that as in CHAINMAIL, a character cannot remain invisible and
attack). It affects only the person or thing upon whom or which it is cast. Range: 24”
Wizard Lock: Similar to a Hold Portal, this spell lasts indefinitely. It can be opened
by a Knock without breaking the spell. A Wizard Lock can be passed through without a spell of any kind by a Magic-User three levels above the one who placed the
spell.
Detect Evil: A spell to detect evil thought or intent in any creature or evilly enchanted object. Note that poison, for example, is neither good nor evil. Duration:
2 turns. Range: 6”.
ESP: A spell which allows the user to detect the thoughts (if any) of whatever lurks
behind doors or in the darkness. It can penetrate solid rock up to about 2’ in thickness, but a thin coating of lead will prevent its penetration. Duration: 12 turns.
Range: 6”25
Continual Light: This spell creates a light wherever the caster desires. It sheds a
circle of illumination 24” in diameter, but does not equal full daylight. It continues to
shed light until dispelled. Range: 12”.
Knock: A spell which opens secret doors, held portals, doors locked by magic,
barred or otherwise secured gates, etc. Range: 6”.
3rd Level:
Fly: By means of this spell the user is able to fly at a speed of up to 12”/turn. The
spell lasts for the number of turns equal to the level of the Magic-User plus the number of pips on a six-sided die which is secretly determined by the referee.
Hold Person: A spell similar to a Charm Person, but which is of both limited duration and greater effect. It will affect from 1–4 persons. If it is cast at only a single
person it has the effect of reducing the target’s saving throw against magic by –2.
Duration: 6 turns + level of the caster. Range: 12”.
Dispel Magic: Unless countered, this spell will be effective in dispelling enchantments of most kinds (referee’s option), except those on magical items and the like.
This is modified by the following formula. The success of a Dispel Magic spell is
a ratio of the dispeller over the original spell caster, so if a 5th-level Magic-User
attempts to dispel the spell of a 10th-level Magic-User there is a 50% chance of success. Duration: 1 turn. Range: 12”.
Clairvoyance: Same as ESP spell except the spell user can visualize rather than
merely pick up thoughts.
Clairaudience: Same as Clairvoyance except it allows hearing rather than visualization. This is one of the few spells which can be cast through a Crystal Ball (see
Book II).
Fire Ball: A missile which springs from the finger of the Magic-User. It explodes
with a burst radius of 2” (slightly larger than specified in CHAINMAIL). In a confined
space the Fire Ball will generally conform to the shape of the space (elongate or
whatever). The damage caused by the missile will be in proportion to the level of its
user. A 6th-level Magic-User throws a 6-die missile, a 7th a 7-die missile, and so on.
(Note that Fire Balls from Scrolls (see Book II) and Wand are 6-die missiles and those
from Staves are 8-die missiles. Duration: 1 turn. Range: 24”
Lightning Bolt: Utterance of this spell generates a lightning bolt 6” long and up
to 3/4” wide. If the space is not long enough to allow its full extension, the missile
will double back to attain 6”, possibly striking its creator. It is otherwise similar to
a Fire Ball, but as stated in CHAINMAIL the head of the missile may never extend
beyond the 24” range.
Protection from Evil, 10’ Radius: A Protection from Evil spell which extends
to include a circle around the Magic-User and also lasts for 12 rather than 6 turns.
Invisibility, 10’ Radius: An Invisibility spell with an extended projection but
otherwise no different from the former spell. Infravision: This spell allows the
recipient to see infrared light waves, thus enabling him to see in total darkness.
Duration: 1 day. Range of infravision: 40–60’.
Infravision: This spell allows the recipient to see infrared light waves, thus enabling
him to see in total darkness. Duration: 1 day. Range of infravision: 40–60’.26
Slow Spell: A broad-area spell which affects up to 24 creatures in a maximum
area of 6” × 12”. Duration: 3 turns. Range: 24”.
Haste Spell: This is exactly the opposite of a Slow Spell in effect, but otherwise like
it. Note that it will counter its opposite and vice-versa.
Protection from Normal Missiles: The recipient of this charm becomes impervious to normal missiles. This implies only those missiles projected by normal (not
above normal) men and/or weapons. Duration: 12 turns. Range: 3”.
Water Breathing: A spell whereby it is possible to breathe underwater without
harm or difficulty. Duration: 12 turns. Range 3”.
4th Level:
Polymorph Self: A spell allowing the user to take the shape of anything he desires, but he will not thereby acquire the combat abilities of the thing he has polymorphed himself to resemble. That is, while the user may turn himself into a dragon
of some type, he will not gain the ability to fight and breathe, but he will be able to
fly. Duration: 6 turns + the level of the Magic-User employing it.
Polymorph Others: Unlike the spell to Polymorph Self, this spell lasts until it is
dispelled. The spell gives all characteristics of the form of the creature, so a creature
polymorphed into a dragon acquires all of the dragon’s ability — not necessarily
mentality, however. Likewise, a troll polymorphed into a snail would have innate
resistance to being stepped on and crushed by a normal man. Range: 6”.
Remove Curse: A spell to remove any one curse or evil sending. Note that using
this spell on a “cursed sword,” for example, would make the weapon an ordinary
sword, not some form of enchanted blade. Range: Adjacent to the object.
Wall of Fire: The spell will create a wall of fire which lasts until the Magic-User
no longer concentrates to maintain it. The fire wall is opaque. It prevents creatures
with under four hit dice from entering/passing through. Undead will take two dice of
damage (2–12) and other creatures one die (1–6) when breaking through the fire.
The shape of the wall can be either a plane of up to 6” width and 2” in height, or it
can be cast in a circle of 3” diameter and 2” in height. Range: 6”.
Wall of Ice: A spell to create a wall of ice six inches thick, in dimensions like that
of a Wall of Fire. It negates the effects of creatures employing fire and/or fire spells.
It may be broken through by creatures with four or more hit dice, with damage
equal to one die (1–6) for non-fire employing creatures and double that for fire-users.
Range: 12”
Confusion: This spell will immediately affect creatures with two or fewer hit-dice.
For creatures above two hit dice the following formula is used to determine when
the spell takes effect: score of a twelve-sided die roll less the level of the MagicUser casting the spell = delay in effect, i.e. a positive difference means a turn
delay, while a zero or negative difference means immediate effect. Creatures with
four or more hit dice will have saving throws against magic, and on those turns
they make their saving throws they are not confused; but this check must be made
each turn the spell lasts, and failure means they are confused. The spell will affect
as many creatures as indicated by the score rolled on two six-sided dice with the
addition of +1 for each level above the 8th that the Magic-User casting the spell
has attained. Confused creatures will attack the Magic-User’s party (dice score
2–5), stand around doing nothing (6–8), or attack each other (9–12). Roll each
turn. Duration: 12 turns. Range: 12”.27
Charm Monster: The counterpart of a Charm Person spell which is employable
against all creatures. If animals or creatures with three or fewer hit dice are involved
determine how many are affected by the spell by rolling three six-sided dice. It is
otherwise identical to the Charm Person spell.
Growth of Plants: This spell causes normal brush or woods to become thickly
overgrown and entangled with creepers, vines, thorns, briars and so on, so as to
make the area virtually impassable. It will affect an area of up to 30 square inches,
the dimensions decided by the caster of the spell. Duration: until the spell is negated
by a Dispel Magic. Range: 12”.
Dimension Door: A limited Teleport spell which allows the object to be instantaneously transported up to 36” in any direction (including up or down). There is
no chance of misjudging when using a Dimension Door, so the user always arrives
exactly where he calls, i.e. 12” upwards, 32” east, etc. Range: 1”.
Wizard Eye: A spell which allows the user to send a visual sensor up to 24” away
in order to observe the scene without himself moving. The “eye” is invisible. It moves
12”/turn. Duration: 6 turns.
Massmorph: This spell is used to conceal up to 100 men (or creatures of near
man size) as a woods or orchards. The concealed figures may be moved through
without being detected as anything other than trees, and it will not affect the spell. It
will be negated by a command for the caster or by means of a Dispel Magic spell.
Range: 24”.
Hallucinatory Terrain: By means of this spell, terrain features can either be hidden or created — an illusion which affects a large area. Thus a swamp, hill, ridge,
woods, or the like can be concealed or made to appear. The spell is broken when
the magicked area is contacted by an opponent. Range: 24”.28
5th Level:
Teleport: Instantaneous transportation from place to place, regardless of the distance involved, provided the user knows where he is going (the topography of the
arrival area). Without certain knowledge of the destination teleportation is 75% uncertain, so a score of less than 75% of the percentile dice results in death. If the user
is aware of the general topography of his destination, but has not carefully studied
it, there is an uncertainty factor of 10% low and 10% high. A low score (1–10%)
means death if solid material is contacted. A high score (91–100%) indicates a
fall of from 10 to 100 feet, also possibly resulting in death. If a careful study of the
destination has been previously made, then the Magic-User has only a 1% chance
of teleporting low and a 4% chance of coming in high (10–40 feet).
Hold Monster: Same as Hold Person but applicable to Monsters.
Conjure Elemental: A spell to conjure an Air, Water, Fire or Earth Elemental.
Only one of each type can be conjured by a Magic-User during any one day. The
Elemental will remain until dispelled, but the Magic-User must concentrate on control or the elemental will turn upon its conjurer and attack him (see CHAINMAIL).
Conjured elementals are the strongest, with 16 hit dice as is explained in Book II,
MONSTERS & TREASURE. Range: 24”.
Telekinesis: By means of this spell, objects may be moved by mental force. Weight
limits are calculated by multiplying the level of the Magic-User by 200 Gold Pieces
weight. Thus, a “Necromancer” is able to move a weight equal to 2,000 Gold
Pieces. Duration: 6 turns. Range 12”.
Transmute Rock to Mud: The spell takes effect in one turn, turning earth, sand,
and, of course, rock to mud. The area affected is up to 30 square inches. Creatures
moving into the mud will become mired, possibly sinking if heavy enough or losing
90% of movement otherwise, unless able to fly or levitate. The spell can only be
countered by reversing the incantation (requiring a Transmute Rock to Mud spell) or
by normal process of evaporation (3–18 days as determined by rolling three sixsided dice). Range: 12”.
Wall of Stone: The creation of a stone wall two feet thick with a maximum length
and height equalling 10 square inches. The wall will last until dispelled, broken
down or battered through as a usual stone wall. Range: 6”.
Wall of Iron: Like a Wall of Stone, but the thickness of the wall is three inches and
its maximum area 5 square inches. Duration: 12 turns. Range: 6”.
Animate Dead: The creation of animated skeletons or zombies. It in no way
brings a creature back to life. For the number of dead animated simply roll one die
for every level above the 8th the Magic-User is, thus a “Sorcerer” gets one die or
from 1–6 animated dead. Note that the skeletons or dead bodies must be available
in order to animate them. The spell lasts until dispelled or the animated dead are
done away with.
Magic Jar: By means of this device the Magic-User houses his life force in some
inanimate object (even a rock) and attempts to possess the body of any other creature within 12” of his Magic Jar. The container for his life force must be within 3” of
his body at the time the spell is pronounced. Possession of another body takes place
when the creature in question fails to make its saving throw against magic. If the possessed body is destroyed, the spirit of the Magic-User returns to the Magic Jar, and
from thence it may attempt another possession or return to the Magic-User’s body.29
The spirit of the Magic-User can return to the Magic Jar at any time he so desires.
Note that if the body of the Magic-User is destroyed the life force must remain in a
possessed body or the Magic Jar. If the Magic Jar is destroyed, the Magic-User is
totally annihilated.
Contact Higher Plane: This spell allows the magical-type to seek advice and
gain knowledge from creatures inhabiting higher planes of existence (the referee).
Of course, the higher the plane contacted, the greater the number of questions that
can be asked, the greater the chance that the information will be known, and the
higher the probability that the question will be answered truthfully. Use the table
below to determine these factors, as well as the probability of the Magic-User going
insane. Only questions which can be answered “yes” or “no” are permitted.
Plane # of Questions Chance of Knowing Veracity Insanity
3rd 3 25% 30% nil
4th 4 30% 40% 10%
5th 5 35% 50% 20%
6th 6 40% 60% 30%
7th 7 50% 70% 40%
8th 8 60% 75% 50%
9th 9 70% 80% 60%
10th 10 80% 85% 70%
11th 11 90% 90% 80%
12th 12 95% 100% 90%30
If a Magic-User goes insane, he will remain so for a number of weeks equal to the
number of the plane he was attempting to contact, the strain making him totally incapacitated until the time has elapsed. For each level above the 11th, Magic Users
should have a 5% better chance of retaining their sanity. The spell is usable only
once every game week (referee’s option).
Passwall: A spell which opens a hole in a solid rock wall, man-sized and up to 10’
in length. Duration: 3 turns. Range: 3”.
Cloudkill: This spell creates a moving, poisonous cloud of vapor which is deadly
to all creatures with less than five hit dice. Movement: 6”/turn according to wind
direction, or directly away from the spell caster if there is no wind. Dimensions: 3”
diameter. Duration: 6 turns, but the cloud is dispelled by unusually strong winds or
trees. Note that the cloud is heavier than air, so it will sink to the lowest possible level.
Feeblemind: A spell usable only against Magic-Users, it causes the recipient to
become feeble-minded until the spell is countered with a Dispel Magic. Because of
its specialized nature the Feeblemind spell has a 20% better chance of success, i.e.
lowers the Magic-User’s saving throw against magic by 4, so that if normally a 12
or better were required to save against magic, a 16 would be required against a
Feeblemind. Range: 24”.
Growth of Animals: A spell which will cause from 1–6 normal-sized animals
(not merely mammals) to grow to giant-size with proportionate attack capabilities.
Duration: 12 turns. Range 12”.
6th Level:
Stone to Flesh: This spell turns stone to flesh, and it is reversible, so as to turn flesh
to stone. It is particularly useful in reviving characters who have been “stoned” by
some monster. It is permanent unless a reversed spell is used. Range: 12”.
Reincarnation: A spell to bring a dead character back to life in some other form.
The form in which the character is Reincarnated is dependent upon his former alignment (Law, Neutrality or Chaos). Use a random determination on the Character
Alignment table, and whatever the result is, the reincarnated character is that creature and must play as it. If he comes back as a man, determine which class, and roll
a six-sided die to determine which level in that class, and similarly check level for
reincarnation as an elf or dwarf.
Invisible Stalker: The conjuration of an extra-dimensional monster which can be
controlled with merely a word from the Magic-User who conjured him. The Invisible
Stalker will continue on its mission until it is accomplished, regardless of time or
distance. They cannot be dispelled once conjured, except through attack. Details of
the Invisible Stalker itself will be found in the next book.
Lower Water: Utterance of this spell causes the water level in a river or similar
body of liquid to drop 50% of its depth for ten turns. Range: 24”.
Part Water: A spell which will part water up to 10’ deep for a maximum of six
turns. Range: 12”.
Projected Image: By means of this spell the Magic-User projects an image of himself up to 24” away, and all spells and the like used thereafter appear to originate
from the Projected Image. Duration: 6 turns. Range: 24”.31
Anti-Magic Shell: A field which surrounds the Magic-User and makes him totally
impervious to all spells. It also prevents any spells from being sent through the shell
by the Magic-User who conjured it. Duration: 12 turns.
Death Spell: An incantation which kills from 2–16 creatures with fewer than seven
hit dice. The creatures must be within an area of 6” × 6” to come under the spell.
Range: 24”.
Geas: A spell which forces the recipient to perform some task (as desired by the
Magic-User casting the Geas). Any attempt to deviate from the performance of
the task will result in weakness, and ignoring the Geas entirely brings death. The
referee must carefully adjudicate the casting and subsequent performance of the
geased individual when this spell is used. Duration: Until the task is completed.
Range: 3”.
Disintegrate: This spell will cause material of any kind — other than that of a
magical nature — to Disintegrate. It will blast a tree, dragon (if it fails to make its
saving throw against magic), wall section, or whatever. Range: 6”
Move Earth: When above ground the Magic-User may utilize this spell to move
prominences such as hills or ridges. The spell takes one turn to go into effect. The
terrain affected will move at the rate of 6” per turn. Duration: 6 turns. Range 24”.
Control Weather: The Magic-User can perform any one of the following weather
control operations with this spell: Rain, Stop Rain, Cold Wave, Heat Wave, Tornado, Stop Tornado, Deep Clouds, Clear Sky.
Clerics:
1st Level:
Cure Light Wounds: During the course of one full turn this spell will remove hits
from a wounded character (including elves, dwarves, etc.). A die is rolled, one pip
added, and the resultant total subtracted from the hit points the character has taken.
Thus from 2–7 hit points of damage can be removed.
Purify Food & Water: This spell will make spoiled or poisoned food and water
usable. The quantity subject to a single spell is approximately that which would
serve a dozen people.
Detect Magic: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users.
Detect Evil: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users except that it has a duration of 6 turns and a range of 12”.
Protection from Evil: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users except that it
lasts for 12 turns.
Light: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users, except that it has a basic duration of 12 turns.
2nd Level:
Find Traps: By means of this spell the Cleric will locate any mechanical or magical
traps within a radius of 3”. The spell lasts 2 turns.32
Hold Person: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users except that its duration
is 9 turns and its range 18”.
Bless: During any turn the prospective recipients of a Bless spell are not in combat
the Cleric may give them this benison. A blessing raises morale by +1 and also adds
+1 to attack dice. The spell lasts six turns.
Speak with Animals: This spell allows the Cleric to speak with any form of animal life, understanding what they say in reply. There is a possibility that the animal(s)
spoken with will perform services for the Cleric, and they will never attack the party
the Cleric is with. (The manner of handling the probabilities of action by animals is
discussed in the next book). Duration: 6 turns. Range: 3”.
3rd Level:
Remove Curse: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users.
Cure Disease: A spell which cures any form of disease. The spell is the only
method to rid a character of a disease from a curse, for example.
Locate Object: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users, except that the base
range is 9”.
Continual Light: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users, except that the light
shed is equal to full daylight.33
4th Level:
Neutralize Poison: A spell to counter the harmful effects of poison. Note that
it will not aid a character killed by poison, however. It will affect only one object.
Duration: 1 turn.
Cure Serious Wounds: This spell is like a Light Wound spell, but the effects are
double, so two dice are rolled and one pip is added to each die. Therefore, from 4
to 14 hit points will be removed by this spell.
Protection from Evil, 10’ radius: This spell is the same as that for Magic-Users.
Turn Sticks to Snakes: Anytime there are sticks nearby a Cleric can turn them
into snakes, with a 50% chance that they will be poisonous. From 2–16 snakes can
be conjured (roll two eight-sided dice). He can command these conjured snakes to
perform as he orders. Duration: 6 turns. Range 12”.
Speak with Plants: This spell allows the Cleric to speak with all forms of plant
life, understanding what they say in reply. Plants so spoken to will obey commands of the Cleric, such as part to allow a passage and so on. This spell does
not give the Cleric the power to command trees as Treants do. Duration: 6 turns.
Range: 3”.
Create Water: By means of this spell, the Cleric can create a supply of drinkable
water sufficient for a party of a dozen men and horses for one day. The quantity
doubles for every level above the 8th the Cleric has attained.
5th Level:
Dispel Evil: Similar to a Dispel Magic spell, this allows a Cleric to dispel any evil
sending or spell within a 3” radius. It functions immediately. Duration: 1 turn.
Raise Dead: The Cleric simply points his finger, utters the incantation, and the
dead person is raised. This spell works with men, elves, and dwarves only. For each
level the Cleric has progressed beyond the 8th, the time limit for resurrection extends
another four days. Thus, an 8th-level Cleric can raise a body dead up to four days,
a 9th-level Cleric can raise a body dead up to eight days, and so on. Naturally, if
the character’s Constitution was weak, the spell will not bring him back to life. In
any event raised characters must spend two game weeks’ time recuperating from
the ordeal.
Commune: A spell which puts the Cleric in touch with the powers “above” and
asks for help in the form of answers to three questions. Communing is allowed but
once each week maximum (referee’s option as to making less frequent). Veracity and
knowledge should be near total. Once per year a special communing should be allowed wherein the Cleric can ask double the number of questions.
Quest: This is similar to the Geas, except that the character sent upon a Quest by
the Cleric is not killed by failure to carry out the service. However, the Cleric may
curse him with whatever he desires for failure, and the referee should decide if such
a curse will take effect if the character ignores the Quest, basing the effectiveness
of the curse on the phrasing of it and the alignment and actions of the character so
cursed.
Insect Plague: By means of this spell, the Cleric calls to him a vast cloud of insects and sends them where he will, within the spell range. They will obscure vision
and drive creatures with less than three hit dice off in rout. The dimensions of the34
Insect Plague are 36 square inches. Duration: 1 game day. Range: 48”. (Note:
This spell is effective only above ground.)
Create Food: A spell with which the Cleric creates sustenance sufficient for a party
of a dozen for one game day. The quantity doubles for every level above the 8th
the Cleric has attained.
Note: There are Anti-Clerics (listed below) who have similar powers to Clerics. Those
Clerical spells underlined on the table for Cleric Spells have a reverse effect, all others functioning as noted. The chief exception is the Raise Dead spell which becomes:
The Finger of Death: Instead of raising the dead, this spell creates a “death
ray” which will kill any creature unless a saving throw is made (where applicable). Range: 12”. (A Cleric-type may use this spell in a life-or-death situation,
but misuse will immediately turn him into an Anti-Cleric.)
Anti-Clerics: Evil Acolyte, Evil Adept, Shaman, Evil Priest, Evil Curate, Evil Bishop,
Evil Lama, Evil High Priest.
MAGICAL RESEARCH:
Both Magic-Users and Clerics may attempt to expand on the spells listed (as applicable by class). This is a matter of time and investment. The level of the magic required to operate the spell (determination by referee) dictates the initial investment.
Investment for 1st level is 2,000 Gold Pieces, 2nd level is 4,000 Gold Pieces, 3rd
level is 8,000 Gold Pieces, 4th level is 16,000 Gold Pieces, 5th level is 32,000
Gold Pieces, and 6th level is 64,000 Gold Pieces. The time required is one week
per spell level. For every amount equal to the basic investment spent there is a 20%
chance of success, cumulative. An investment of 10,000 Gold Pieces in order to
develop a new 1st-level spell, for example, has a 100% chance of success after one
game week.
The level of the spell researched must be consistent with the level of the MagicUser or Cleric involved, i.e. the character must be able to use spells equal to or
above the level of the one he desires to create.
Once a new spell is created the researcher may include it in the list appropriate
to its level. He may inform others of it, thus enabling them to utilize it, or he may
keep it to himself.
BOOKS OF SPELLS:
Characters who employ spells are assumed to acquire books containing the spells
they can use, one book for each level. If a duplicate set of such books is desired,
the cost will be the same as the initial investment for research as listed above, i.e.
2,000, 4,000, 8,000, etc. Loss of these books will require replacement at the above
expense.TM & ©2013 Wizards of the Coast LLC.

</WRAP>